# Release 2023.2

Here you will find all the important new features and release notes of the Platform Version 2023.2 release. 

## Most Important New Features and Improvements

**Data Quality Management**

Main features: 
- Configuration of Data Quality checks with an easy to use interface.
- Possibility to add multiple checks for data objects to check different aspects of your data.
- Out of the box checks for mandatory fields and validations.
- Selection of other fields to be checked via a dropdown to get the full picture.
- Symfony Expression fields for more comprehensive data checks.
- Option to weight the different checks to focus on specific areas of your data.
- Exclude objects from being checked with the help of [Symfony Expressions](https://symfony.com/doc/current/reference/formats/expression_language.html).
- Configurable ranges to be shown on various backend views.
- Displaying data quality scores in the tree view.
- Displaying detailed information about your data quality in the object editor including suggestions for the improvement of the data quality.
- Displaying data quality score in the grid view with the option to filter and export the included data objects.

**Bookmark Lists**

Main features: 
- Create bookmark lists for Assets, Data Objects, Documents, or element folders.
- Add new elements to your list with a simple drag & drop.
- Organize elements into custom folders specific to your list.
- Access elements and their child elements directly from your list.
- Drag & drop elements from your list into Pimcore editors' drop targets.
- Share existing bookmark lists with other users.

**Pimcore Datahub Webhooks**

Main features:
- Send requests to your configured subscribers for a variation of events such as:
    - Added, updated and deleted events for all kind of elements (Data Objects, Assets and Documents).
    - Entered and completed events for workflows.
- Configure the payload sent to your subscribers:
    - Define included element (sub) types and optionally include unpublished elements.
    - Define workspaces for your requests among available data fields for Data Objects.
    - Include binary data, such as videos, images, thumbnails and more for Assets.
- Limit event dispatching to subscribers for configured workspaces only.


## Upgrade Notes

Before updating, have a look at all the upgrade notes relevant to your system: 
