# Release 2023.1

Here you will find all the important new features and release notes of the Platform Version 2023.1 release. 

## Important Notes
This release is a major release and contains Pimcore Core Framework 11 as well as updates for all the core extensions to be compatible. 

## Most Important New Features and Improvements
For Pimcore Core Framework, Version 11 is all about:
- Advancing code quality and structure.
- Updating third-party dependencies of Pimcore.
- Refactoring to reduce technical debt.

And it also adds some features like:
- An abstraction layer for our WYSIWYG editor that allows you to integrate the WYSIWYG editors of your choice.
  We adopt the TinyMCE as our default implementation.
- An implementation of Gotenberg, a highly versatile PDF generator for generating Asset document previews of Office documents (like Word, Excel, and PowerPoint) and PDFs in the Web to Print module.
- Enhanced extensibility by adding support for custom Document and Asset types. 

Also, for all Pimcore core extension versions, the focus is on upgrading dependencies and making them compatible with Pimcore Core Framework again.

## Upgrade Notes

Before updating, have a look at all the upgrade notes relevant to your system: 
- Pimcore Core Framework [Upgrade Guide](../../Pimcore/Installation_and_Upgrade/Updating_Pimcore/Preparing_for_V11) 
  and [Upgrade Notes](../../Pimcore/Installation_and_Upgrade/Upgrade_Notes/)
- [Portal Engine](../../Portal_Engine/Installation/Upgrade#upgrade-to-300)
- [Datahub](../../Datahub/Installation_and_Upgrade/Upgrade_Notes#160)
- [Datahub File Export](../../Datahub_File_Export/Installation/Upgrade#upgrade-to-200)
- [Datahub Simple Rest API](../../Datahub_Simple_Rest/Installation/Upgrade_Notes#v200)
- [Headless Documents](../../Headless_Documents/Installation/Upgrade#update-to-version-20)
- [OpenId Connect](../../OpenID_Connect/Upgrade_Notes#110)
- [Statistics Explorer](../../Statistics_Explorer/Installation_and_Configuration/Upgrade#upgrade-to-200)
- [Customer Management Framework](../../Customer_Management_Framework/Installation/Update#update-to-version-4)
- [Advanced Object Search](../../Advanced_Object_Search/Upgrade_Notes)
